.TH TSHELPER 1 "May 2026" "1.0.0" "Linux Troubleshooting Helper"

.SH NAME
tshelper \- a layman-friendly, one-stop Linux troubleshooting tool

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tshelper
.RI [ SUBCOMMAND ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B tshelper
is a bash-based Linux troubleshooting helper designed for everyday users and sysadmins alike.
It bundles the most common diagnostic commands — with the right flags — into a single tool,
so you never have to remember syntax again.

Run it with no arguments to get an interactive menu, or pass a subcommand to jump straight
to a specific check. All output is colour-coded and human-readable, with plain-English
pass/fail indicators where applicable.

.B tshelper
covers disk usage, memory, CPU, network diagnostics, running processes, systemd services,
and system logs — making it a single source of truth for Linux troubleshooting.

.SH SUBCOMMANDS

.TP
.B (no argument)
Launch the interactive menu. Navigate with number keys and press
.B q
to quit.

.TP
.B disk
Show disk space usage (human-readable), inode usage, and the top 10 largest
directories in the current path.

Runs:
.I df \-h, df \-i, du \-ah \-\-max\-depth=1

.TP
.B memory
Show RAM and swap usage, and list the top 10 most memory-hungry processes.

Runs:
.I free \-h, ps aux \-\-sort=\-%mem

.TP
.B cpu
Display CPU model, core/thread count, current MHz, system load averages,
and the top CPU-consuming processes.

Runs:
.I lscpu, uptime, ps aux \-\-sort=\-%cpu

.TP
.B network
Run a full network diagnostic suite covering 7 areas:

.RS
.TP
.B [1] Internet Connectivity
Pings
.I 8.8.8.8
and
.I google.com
with plain-English pass/fail output. Distinguishes between a gateway issue
(cannot reach IP) and a DNS issue (cannot resolve hostname).

.TP
.B [2] DNS Resolution
Displays configured DNS servers from
.I /etc/resolv.conf,
performs a live DNS lookup, and a reverse DNS test using
.I dig
or
.I nslookup.

.TP
.B [3] Network Interfaces & Speed/Errors
Lists all interfaces with IP addresses, shows RX/TX error and drop counters,
and reports link speed and duplex using
.I ethtool
(if available).

Runs:
.I ip \-br addr, ip \-s link, ethtool

.TP
.B [4] Open Ports
Lists all ports the machine is actively listening on, including the process
name responsible for each port.

Runs:
.I ss \-tulnp

.TP
.B [5] Who's Connected
Shows all established inbound connections and summarises unique remote IPs
with connection counts.

Runs:
.I ss \-tnp state established

.TP
.B [6] Firewall Rules
Auto-detects whether
.I ufw
or
.I iptables
is in use, and displays active INPUT and OUTPUT rules.

Runs:
.I ufw status verbose, iptables \-L INPUT/OUTPUT \-n \-v

.TP
.B [7] Routing Table
Displays the full routing table and highlights the default gateway.

Runs:
.I ip route
.RE

.TP
.B process
Snapshot of all running processes sorted by CPU usage, plus a process tree.

Runs:
.I ps aux \-\-sort=\-%cpu, pstree \-p

.TP
.B services
Lists failed systemd units and all currently running services.

Runs:
.I systemctl \-\-failed, systemctl list\-units \-\-type=service \-\-state=running

.TP
.B logs
Shows the last 30 lines of system/kernel logs and the last 10 SSH auth log
entries. Falls back gracefully between journald, syslog, and messages.

Runs:
.I journalctl \-n 30, journalctl \-u ssh \-n 10

.TP
.B all
Runs all of the above checks in sequence: disk, memory, cpu, network,
process, services, logs.

.TP
.B help
Display usage information and a list of all subcommands.

.SH EXAMPLES

.TP
Launch the interactive menu:
.B tshelper

.TP
Check disk usage directly:
.B tshelper disk

.TP
Run a full network diagnostic:
.B tshelper network

.TP
Run everything at once (useful for a health report):
.B tshelper all

.TP
Pipe the full report to a file for sharing:
.B tshelper all > report.txt

.SH INSTALLATION

Copy the script to your PATH and make it executable:

.RS
.nf
sudo cp tshelper.sh /usr/local/bin/tshelper
sudo chmod +x /usr/local/bin/tshelper
.fi
.RE

Install the man page:

.RS
.nf
sudo cp tshelper.1 /usr/local/share/man/man1/
sudo mandb
man tshelper
.fi
.RE

.SH DEPENDENCIES

.B tshelper
uses standard Linux utilities that are present on most distributions.
Optional tools enhance output when available:

.TP
.B Required (standard on all distros)
bash, ps, df, du, free, ip, ss, ping, cat, awk, sort

.TP
.B Optional (install for richer output)
.I dig / nslookup
\- for DNS resolution checks (package:
.B dnsutils
)

.I ethtool
\- for interface speed and duplex info (package:
.B ethtool
)

.I pstree
\- for process tree view (package:
.B psmisc
)

.I ufw / iptables
\- for firewall rule display

.I journalctl
\- for structured log output (systemd systems)

.SH EXIT STATUS

.TP
.B 0
Success.

.TP
.B 1
Unknown subcommand was provided.

.SH NOTES
Some subcommands (firewall rules via iptables, certain network stats) may require
.B root
or
.B sudo
privileges to display full output.

.SH AUTHOR
Written for layman-friendly Linux troubleshooting.
Maintained by the tshelper project.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR df (1),
.BR du (1),
.BR free (1),
.BR ps (1),
.BR ss (8),
.BR ip (8),
.BR ping (8),
.BR dig (1),
.BR iptables (8),
.BR ufw (8),
.BR journalctl (1),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR ethtool (8),
.BR pstree (1)
